Intro1:
Smart technologies are useful. It’s undeniable that they are essential parts of our lives today. These technologies help us with everything we do, from speeding up daily routines to taking the burden off our shoulders in normally time-consuming and difficult tasks. Most people today benefit from technology without even noticing. However, it’s exactly due to the seamless integration with our lives that we often stay ignorant about the important yet unseen aspects of using technology, with notable ones being the effects on our health and the environment
Intro2:
This program will briefly walk through some important impacts of technology that we need to pay attention to, some problems technologies bring, and some solutions on how we can fix them. 
Benefit1:
Computers help improve our general health in several ways. Today, a lot of medical information is stored and communicated through computers. This allows for organized and safe storing of important information like patient records. On top of this, much biological and medical research is done with the help of computing technology. Computers can not only be used to simulate chemical effects but sometimes even make breakthroughs themselves. Alpha fold is a recently developed AI model that can accurately predict protein shapes with a 95% accuracy. These used to be tedious problems that individually, would take even experts a long time to solve. But now they can be solved with essentially no human effort. Alpha fold has a medical application as well, it was used to predict the COVID-19 viral protein to help find effective treatments. 
Benefit2:
Computers were also able to help with safety and mental health during the pandemic. Computer softwares like Zoom has allowed friends and families to connect digitally and support each other through difficult times. Remote learning and working allowed people to still maintain semi-regular routines when staying at home. And online shopping and contactless payment has helped vulnerable groups, like elders, to avoid potential contacts with the virus.
Benefit3:
Other technologies, such as robotics, can be used with computers to help humans avoid dangerous situations. For example, the robot dog “spot” made by Boston Dynamic is equipped with a computer and is fully automated. It has a variety of use cases, one of them being navigating dangerous places and it can identify hazardous materials in the place of humans. Similarly, most modern vehicles are equipped with sensors and course correction softwares to ensure the driver stays on the road. 
Benefit4:
Computers can also help protect the environment by extrapolating information. For example, they can be used to calculate and predict the locations of plastic piles in the ocean. This method is being developed and used by the Ocean Cleanup Project, one of the leading groups in the environmental cleanup initiatives. Since most of the plastic floating in the ocean is either too small or exists below the surface, they are difficult to track with conventional methods. In these cases computer algorithms can be used instead to predict the locations of these garbage piles based on historical information about ocean currents and garbage pile locations. 
Benefit5:
In large urban cities, computers can be used to examine the usage of energy and release of emissions, then use these data to optimize the energy generation and allocation for the city
Problem1:
Despite all the conveniences, computers also come with several significant downsides. As people become increasingly reliant on computers, they start spending too much time with them without taking the needed breaks. Sitting in front of a computer for too long can strain and cause damage to the back, the shoulders, and the neck. While staring at any screen for too long can cause eye strain and reduce eyesight and even cause headaches. In the US, more than 40% of young adults today suffer from nearsightedness, double the rate from 50 years ago. Using computers right before going to bed can also overstimulate the brain and prevent proper sleep. 
Problem2:
Computers have negative mental effects as well. Negative feelings such as self-doubt and loneliness can be created by toxic online interactions or deceiving social media posts. These feelings can make someone suffer anxiety and even depression. These problems may become chronic and eventually even physically affect the body. 
Problem3:
Computers also cause problems in the environment. As computers get frequently updated, they are often thrown away and become e-waste that is difficult to recycle. These e-wastes often contain toxic elements such as mercury and arsenic. Over 70 % of all toxic wastes are e-waste. Yet most of these wastes are either thrown into landfills or incinerators without processing. They release toxic materials into the air and damage the environment around them. This not only applies to computers but accessories of these computers such as iPhone charging cables. As of 2022, over 42 Million tons of electronic waste were thrown out. 
Problem4:
Computers are also starting to consume much more energy. The data center industry consumed around 400 terawatt-hours of energy in 2019 alone. While in personal computers, CPU and Video cards have been increasing in power consumption year over year. Around 80% of the world is still supplied by energy generated from fossil fuels. So the energy that is consumed by these computers would have mostly come from sources that emit large amounts of greenhouse gasses and pollution. 
Solution1:
Luckily, there are already some implemented or proposed solutions to these problems. For the effects of computers on your health, the best solution is self regulation. There are many guides on proper procedures and recommended intervals to take breaks and exercise. Releasing the strain on the body and eye regularly can drastically reduce the long term impact of using computers. For parents, many devices now support parental mode with times limits each day. This prevents the children from overusing their eyes. 
Solution2:
As a community, we should also push for more regulations on social media platforms, for example, Twitter has features where it will label posts with misinformation and hide content of posts that are inappropriate. Similarly, we can lessen the negative mental effects of social media with stricter rules on aspects such as false advertising and hateful comments. 
Solution3:
For the environment, reusing is one of the most effective ways to reduce harm. Instead of throwing out broken electronics, attempting to repair, resale, or partially repurpose them for another use can drastically help reduce waste. A good example is turning old personal computers into home servers or media players. Unfortunately, this is not always possible for devices such as smartphones or wireless earbuds. In these cases, the best solution is to properly recycle them.
Solution5:
In Ottawa, the city recycling system does not accept electronic waste. However, electronics manufacturers like Bestbuy or Canada Computers buy older electronics, fix and refurbish them to resale. Stores like Staples and Rogers offer a recycling program that takes care of all sorts of used electronics and processes them responsibly. 
Solution6:
It’s also important to support and advocate for more responsible manufacturing for electronics producers. The right-to-repair movement - an attempt to push for electronic products to be more consumer-friendly and repairable, has gained momentum in the past years and has attracted the attention of both the public and policymakers. 
Solution7:
Recently, the European Union has announced it will demand all electronic manufacturers to use USB type C ports for charging and data. Doing so allows for users to use only one cable for all their devices, which saves money, time, and reduces waste. This is one instance of how pushing for more responsible practices of electronic manufacturers could benefit consumers and the environment. It is important that we continue to push for these kinds of positive trends. 
Solution8:
Though computers come with a unique set of new problems, as long as we take care to maintain a balance and pay attention to the problems this program has explained, we can keep using and advancing technology to our advantage without experiencing negative consequences. 



